Nahita ny vehivavy ny mpianatra .
saw the woman the student .
The student saw the woman .

m-i-vidy ny akoho Rabe .
PRES-ACT-buy the chicken Rabe .
Rabe is buying the chicken .

no-vidi-n-dRabe ny akoho
PAST-buy-PASS-Rabe the chicken
The chicken was bought by Rabe

n-an-andrana n-a-mono ny akoho Rabe .
PAST-ACT-try PAST-ACT-kill the chicken Rabe .
Rabe tried to kill the chicken .

m-an-aiky ho-sas-ana ny zaza .
PRES-ACT-agree FUT-wash-PASS the child .
The child agrees to be washed .

novonoin-dRasoa ny akoho .
PAST-kill-PASS-Rasoa the chicken .
The chicken was killed by Rasoa .

nanandrana novonoin-dRasoa ny akoho .
try-ACT kill-PASS-Rasoa the chicken .
Rasoa tried to kill the chicken .

mikasa hovaki-ko ity boky ity .
intend-ACT read-PASS-1SG this book this .
I intend to read this book .

nitsahatra tsy hanin-dRabe ny siramamy .
stop-ACT NEG eat-PASS-Rabe the sugar .
Rabe stopped not eating sugar .

nanandrana novonoin-dRasoa ny akoho .
try-ACT kill-PASS-Rasoa the chicken .
Rasoa tried to kill the chicken .

Mividy ny boky ao ambanin' ny latabatra ny ankizy .
pres-buy the book there on the table the child .
The child buys the book on the table .

Mividy io ny ankizy .
pres-buy it the child .
The child buys it .

m-i-toetra amin' ilay trano izahay
PRES-ACTIVE-live in that house 1PL-EXCL-NOM
We live in that house

mihevitra Rabe fa mitady ny zaza Rasoa
think Rabe that look-for the child Rasoa
Rabe thinks that Rasoa is looking for the child

heverin-dRabe fa mitady ny zaza Rasoa
think-PASS-Rabe that look-for the child Rasoa
That Rasoa is looking for the child is thought by Rabe

manomboka manasa ny lamba Rasoa
begin wash the clothes Rasoa
Rasoa is beginning to wash the clothes

mikiry manasa ny lamba Rasoa
intend wash the clothes Rasoa
Rasoa intends to wash the clothes

manomboka sasan-dRasoa ny lamba
begin wash-PASS-Rasoa the clothes
The clothes are beginning to be washed by Rasoa

mikiry sasan-dRasoa ny lamba
intend wash-PASS-Rasoa the clothes
#The clothes intend to be washed by Rasoa

nividy ny mofo ilay vehivavy
buy-ACT the bread that woman
That woman bought the bread

iza no nividy ny mofo ?
who PRT buy-ACT the bread ?
Who bought the bread yesterday ?

nividy ny mofo omaly Rasoa
buy-ACT the bread yesterday Rasoa
Rasoa bought the bread yesterday

nividy ny mofo tany an-tsena Rasoa
buy-ACT the bread there at-market Rasoa
Rasoa bought bread at the market

taiza no nividy ny mofo Rasoa ?
where PRT buy-ACT the bread Rasoa ?
Where did Rasoa buy the bread ?

novidin-dRasoa ny mofo
buy-PASS-Rasoa the bread
The bread was bought by Rasoa

inona no novidin-dRasoa ?
what PRT buy-PASS-Rasoa ?
What was bought by Rasoa ?

Rasoa no nihomehy
Rasoa PRT laugh-ACT
It was Rasoa who laughed

ao ambanin' ny fandriana no nanafenan' ny zaza ny lakile
there under the bed PRT hide-CIRC the child the key
It 's under the bed that the child hid my key

tena hovidin' ny zaza ny fiaramanidina
EMPH buy-PASS the child the airplane
The child will indeed buy the airplane

tokony iza no mamangy an-dRabe ?
should who PRT visit-ACT ACC-Rabe ?
Who should visit Rabe ?

Rasoa dia manoroka an-dRabe
Rasoa TOPIC kiss ACC-Rabe
Rasoa , she kisses Rabe

aiza ny inona no vidinao ?
where the what PRT buy-PASS-2SG ?
What do you buy where ?

aiza Rasoa no mividy mofo ?
where Rasoa PRT buy-ACT bread ?
Where does Rasoa buy bread ?

omaly Rabe no nividy vary
yesterday Rabe PRT buy-ACT rice
It was yesterday that Rabe bought rice

#omaly Rasoa no nanapaka bozaka
yesterday Rasoa PRT cut grass
It was Rasoa who cut grass yesterday

oviana Rasoa no nijinja vary ary Rabe no nanapaka bozaka ?
when Rasoa PRT harvest rice and Rabe PRT cut grass ?
When did Rasoa harvest rice and Rabe cut grass ?

iza no tokony mamangy an-dRabe ?
who PRT should visit-ACT ACC-Rabe ?
Who should visit Rabe ?

iza no tsy nihinana ny vary ?
who PRT NEG eat the rice ?
Who did n't eat the rice ?

manaja an'iza ny reniny ?
respect who-ACC the mother-3SG ?
Who does his mother respect ?

namaky ny boky daholo ny ankizy
read the book all the child
All the children read the book

any an-tsena foana Rakoto .
there ACC-market always Rakoto .
Rakoto is always at the market .

tena nanapaka bozaka Rabe
indeed cut grass Rabe
Rabe indeed cut the grass

tokony iza no hamangy an-dRakoto ?
should who PRT visit ACC-Rakoto ?
Who should visit Rakoto ?

tena iza no nanapaka bozaka ?
indeed who PRT cut grass ?
Who indeed cut the grass ?

ny fahazotoana n-i-asa-ana-Rabe
the zeal past-AF-work-CF-Rabe-gen
the zeal with which Rabe worked

ny vehivavy antenaiko ho nanaovan-dRabe trano
the woman hoped-1sg-gen as built-CF-Rabe-gen house
the woman I hoped Rabe built a house for

milalao ao an-trano ny zazalahy sy ny zazavavy
play there in-house the boys and the girls
The boys and the girls are playing in the house

Tsy novakin ny mpianatra io boky io
Not read-TF the students that book that
That book was n't read by the students

Tsy novakin ny mpianatra ve io boky io ?
Not read-TF the students ? that book that ?
Was n't that book read by the students ?

satria tsy novakin ny mpianatra io boky io
because not read-TF the students that book that
because that book was n't read by the students

Aiza no anasan-dRasoa lamba isan'andro ?
Where Foc wash-CF-Rasoa-gen clothes every'day ?
Where are clothes washed every day by Rasoa ?

m-i-enjika any an-tsaha ny omby
pres-act-run there at-hills the cows
The cows are running to the hills

ny olona izay manenjika an-dRabe
the person who chases acc-Rabe
the person who is chasing Rabe

ny mpianatra izay mifanenjika
the student-s rel rec-chase
the students who are chasing each other

m-aN-tolotra nanolotra) vary (hoan'ny vahiny Rabe
pres-act-offer rice to the guest Rabe
Rabe offers rice to the guests

m-i-jery azy aho
pres-act-look-at him I
I am looking at him

m-i-petraka akaikin-dRasoa Rabe
pres-act-sit next-to-Rasoa Rabe
Rabe sits next to Rasoa

nifangala-bitro fotsy i Vao sy i Velo
past-rec-act-steal-rabbit white art Vao and art Velo
Vao and Velo stole each other 's white rabbit

m-i-sasa tanana Rasoa
pres-act-wash hand Rasoa
Rasoa is washing her hands

mifanome vola zanaka Rasoa sy Ravelo
pres-rec-act-give money child Rasoa and Ravelo
Rasoa and Ravelo give money to each other 's children

manintona ny volon ny zanak'i Soa i Vao
pulls the hair the child'art Soa art Vao
Vao is pulling the hair of the Soa 's child

mifandaka intelo Rabe sy Ravao
pres-rec-act-kick three-times Rabe and Ravao
Rabe and Ravao kicked each other three times

nifampindram-bola intelo Rabe sy Ravao
past-rec-borrow-money three-times Rabe and Ravao
Rabe and Ravao borrowed money from each other three times

m-i-laza an-dRasoa ho nangala-bary Ravelo
pres-act-say acc-Rasoa as past-steal-rice Ravelo
Ravelo says Rasoa to have stolen rice

n-ifamp-i-laza ho nangala-bary Rasoa sy Ravelo
past-rec-act-say as past-steal-rice Rasoa and Ravelo
Rasoa and Ravelo said each other to have stolen rice

m-i-hevitra ny miaramila ho resin ny fahavalo isika
pres-act-think the soldier-s as defeat-thm the enemy-gen we-incl
We think the soldiers to have been defeated by the enemy

m-ifamp-i-hevitra ho resin ny fahavalo ny miaramila
pres-rec-act-think as defeat-thm the enemy-gen the soldiers
The soldiers think each other to have been defeated by the enemy

m-i-resadresaka amin-dRabe Rasoa
pres-act-chitchat with-dRabe Rasoa
Rasoa is chitchatting with Rabe

m-ifamp-i-resadresaka Rabe sy Rasoa
pres-rec-act-chitchat Rabe and Rasoa
Rabe and Rasoa are chitchatting with each other

n-i-aro ny zanany sy ny vadiny izy ireo
past-act-defend the child-3gen and the spouse-3gen 3nom dem-pl
They defended their children and their spouses

ny soa n-if-aN-tao-vana-tsika
the good past-rec-act-do-circ-us1pl-incl-gen
the good that was done for each other by us

miady mafy ireo mpifampilaza ho mpangalatra ireo
fight hard those nom-rec-act-say as nom-act-steal those
Those people who said each other to be thieves are fighting hard

tsara ho tadidina ny fifampitokisan ny Malagasy taloha
good fut recall-thm the mutual-trust-circ-of the Malagasy of-yore
It is good to recall the trust in e.o . by the Malagasy in the old days

naniry hifandefa boky izahay
past-act-desire fut-rec-act-send book we-excl
We desired to send each other books

ny boky n-iry-ina-nay h-if-aN-lefa-sana
the books past-desire-thm-1-pl-excl-gen fut-rec-act-send-circ
the books we desired to send to each other

nanampy azy nifandefa entana isika
past-act-help them past-rec-act-send packages we-incl
We helped them send each other packages

n-a-hita sy n-i-arahaba azy ireo aho
past-act-see and past-act-greet 3acc dem-pl 1-sg-nom
I saw and greeted them

n-ifank-a-hita sy n-ifamp-i-arahaba izahay
past-rec-act-seen and past-rec-act-greet we-excl
We saw each other and greeted each other

oviana Rabe no nividy ny vary ?
when Rabe PRT buy-ACT the rice ?
When did Rabe buy the rice ?

tsy nanomboka nihomehy t-amin ny tantara izy .
NEG began laugh PAST-PREP the story he .
He did n't begin to laugh at the story .

nanomboka tsy nihomehy t-amin ny tantara intsony izy .
began NEG laugh PAST-PREP the story NPI he .
He began to no longer laugh at the story .

anomboh-ana mitondra ny fiara Rabe .
begin-CIRC drive the car Rabe .
Rabe begins to drive a car .

nanomboka niteny ity tonon-kira ity Rabe indroa .
began knock this door this Rabe twice .
Rabe twice began to knock on this door .

nanomboka omaly mihomehy daholo ny ankizy .
began yesterday laugh all the children .
Yesterday the children began to all laugh .

nanontany aho hoe iza no nividy ny akoho
ask-ACT 1SG-NOM HOE who FOCUS buy-ACT the chicken
I asked who bought the chicken

Rabe no nividy ny akoho
Rabe FOCUS buy-ACT the chicken
It 's Rabe who bought the chicken

nefa tsy nanana fotoana izy .
but NEG PST-have time they .
but they did n't have time .

