Nächstes Jahr schreibe ich ein Buch über Semantik .
next year write(PRS) I a book on semantics .
Next year , I 'll write a book on semantics .

kein hart-es Holz
no hard-CASstrong wood
no hard piece of wood

Selbst der Hausmeister hielt eine Rede .
even the janitor held a speech .
Even the janitor gave a speech .

weil ich selten die Katze streichle
since I seldom the cat pet
since I seldom pet the cat

Sie darf nie einfach nur IRGENDjemand einladen .
She may never just only irgend-one invite .
She is never allowed to invite just ANYbody .

...weil sie das Klavier auf den dritten Stock hinauf hätten tragen sollen
because they the piano on the third floor upward had carry should
because they should have carried the piano up to the third floor

Die Mutter flocht der Tochter die Haare .
the mother braided the.DAT daughter the hairs .
The mother braided her daughter 's hair .

der Antrag des oder der Dozenten
the petition of-the.GEN.SG or of-the.GEN.PL docent.MSC.GEN.(SG/PL)
the petition of the docent

Wen hat jeder gesehen ?
whom has everyone seen ?
Who did everyone see ?

Schreib du den Aufsatz !
write2sg.Imp you the paper !
You write the paper !

Im Garten hoppeln Kaninchen .
in-the garden hop rabbits .
There are rabbits hopping in the garden .

Uli hat letzte Woche die Ausstellung besucht .
Uli has last week the exhibit visited .
Uli went to the exhibit last week .

. . . dass Hans Peter Marie schwimmen lassen sah .
. . . that Hans Peter Marie swim make saw .
. . . that Hans saw Peter make Marie swim .

Es arbeitet sich gut mit diesem Apparat .
it works SICH well with this device .
One can work well with this device .

weil gestern hier getanzt wurde
since yesterday here danced was
since people danced here yesterday

Sie zerreisst das Papier .
`She ZER-tears the paper' .
She tears the paper .

An sollst du das Licht machen .
on shall you the light make .
You shall switch on the light .

Sie stellte den Brief aus .
she wrote the letter out .
She wrote out the letter .

Je drei Apfel waren faul .
je three apples were rotten .
Three apples per Y were rotten .

als er mich den Reim lehrte
when he 1sg.ACC the.ACC rhyme teached
when he taught me the rhyme

Johannes hat sich einen Wagen gekauft .
Johannes has SICH a car bought .
Johannes bought a car to himself .

Einen Wagen gekauft hat er sich noch keinen .
A car bought has he himself yet none .
As for cars , he has not yet bought one .

Ich habe das Buch dem Hans gegeben
I.nom have the.acc book the.dat Hans given
I gave the book to Hans

Ich dachte daß Karl gestern das Buch gekauft hat
I thought that Karl yesterday the book bought has
I thought that Karl bought the book yesterday

Der Hut wurde dem Mann von der Frauen gegeben .
the.NOM hat was the.DAT man by the.DAT women given .
The hat was given to the man by the women .

daß Otto immer Bücher über WOMBATS liest
that Otto always books about wombats reads
...that Otto always reads books about WOMBATS

Das Buch wurde nackt gelesen .
the book was naked read .
The book was read naked .

Die Wachen öffneten dem AngreiferDAT das Tor .
the guards opened the.DAT attacker the gate .
The guards opened the gate for the attacker .

Den Mann schaudert vor Bären .
the man-acc shudders at bears .
The man shudders at bears .

die mir eilig von einem Arzt verschriebene Medizin
the 1sg.DAT hastily by a doctor prescribed medicine
the medicine hastily prescribed to me by a doctor

Sie hat zwei Fahrräder .
3SG/FEM(NOM) `have':PRES3SG `two'(ACC) `bike':PL.ACC .
she has two bikes .

Gestern hat es geregnet .
yesterday has it rained .
Yesterday , it rained .

ein Schachbrett zum Mitnehmen
a chess-board to.the(neuter) take.along
a chess-board to take along

Das ist die Botschafterin , die die Jäger besucht haben .
this is the ambassador , that the hunters visited have .
This is the ambassador that the hunters visited .

Gestern hat Joachim eine leckere Bratwurst gegessen .
yesterday has Joachim a tasty bratwurst eaten .
Yesterday , Joachim ate a tasty bratwurst .

Gab der Mann der Frau das Buch ?
gave the man the woman the book ?
Did the man give the woman the book ?

sàg's in der frau
say-it DM the:Dsf woman
say it to the woman

Der Fahrer hat den Traktor reparieren lassen .
the.Nom driver has the.Acc tractor repair let .
The driver had the tractor repaired .

weil wir die Informationen jederzeit ab rufen können
because we the information always up call can
because we can call up the information at any time

Mit wem glaubst du mit wem Hans spricht ?
with whoDAT think you with whoDAT Hans speaks ?
Who do you think Hans is talking to ?

weil der Arzt den Patienten einem Test unterzog
because the.NOM doctor the.ACC patient a.DAT test exposed
because the doctor exposed the patient to a test

Jedes Kind hat fünf Katzen gesehen .
every child has five cats seen .
As for cats , every child saw five such animals .

Hans trat ihm gegen das Schienbein .
Hans kicked him.DAT against the shin .
Hans kicked him in the shin .

Peter hat die Bilder die er gemalt hat zurückgelassen .
Peter has the pictures that he painted has left .
Peter has left the pictures that he painted .

Der Film soll gut sein .
the movie sollen-3-sg good be .
The movie is said to be good .

Ich schlief eine Stunde .
I-NOM sleep-PST one hour-ACC .
I slept an hour .

Wie hat das Auto gestern wer repariert ?
how has the car yesterday who fixed ?
How did who fix the car yesterday ?

Wir glauben daß sie Heute ankommt .
we believe that she today arrives .
We believe that she arrives today .

Einen Geist gesehen glaubt Hans dass er am Friedhof hat
A ghost-ACC seen thinks John that he at-the graveyard has
John thinks that he has SEEN A GHOST at the graveyard

weil der Traktor zu reparieren versucht wurde
since the.NOM tractor to repair tried was
since they tried to repair the tractor

Fritz ist seit Donnerstag krank .
Fritz is since Thursday sick .
Fritz has been sick since Thursday .

Ein Außenseiter gewonnen hat hier noch nie .
annom outsider won has hier still never .
An outsider has never won here yet .

Ich habe mir schon immer ein Fahrrad gewünscht .
I have me already always a bike wished .
I always wanted a bike .

Peter erzählt den Kindern eine Geschichte .
Peter tells the:DAT children:DAT an:ACC story:ACC .
Peter tells a story to the children .

Nora hat ihr ZIMmer aufgeräumt .
(Nora has her ROOM cleaned.) .
Nora has cleaned her room .

Peter hat an einem kleinen Tisch GEARBEITET .
Peter has on a small table worked .
Peter worked on a small table .

weil der Kaviar zu essen versucht wurde
since the caviar-NOM to eat tried was
since somebody tried to eat the caviar

Gestern hat ein Mann die Maria besucht der wie mein Onkel aussah
Yesterday has a man-NOM the Mary visited who-MASC like my uncle looked
Yesterday a man visited Mary who looked like my uncle

Chris bewunderte seinen Bruder .
Chris admired his brother .
Chris admired his brother .

weil er das Lied zu laut singt
because he the song too loud sings
because he sings the song too loud

weil er laut das Lied singt
because he loud the song sings
because he loudly sings the song

weil er das Lied laut singt
because he the song loud sings
because he sings the song loud

Gestern hat Joachim eine leckere Bratwurst gegessen .
yesterday has Joachim a tasty bratwurst eaten .
Yesterday , Joachim ate a tasty bratwurst .

Wen hat jeder wo gesehen ?
whom has everyone where seen ?
Where did everyone see who ?

als er mich den Reim lehrte
when he 1sg-ACC the-ACC rhyme teached
when he taught me the rhyme

Schreibst du den Aufsatz ?
write you the paper ?
Are you writing the paper ?

Werden sich diese Leute verteidigen ?
will themselves these people defend ?
Will these people defend themselves ?

Werden diese Leute sich verteidigen ?
will these people themselves defend ?
Will these people defend themselves ?

als der Mann dem Mädchen den Korb gab
when the-NOM man the-DAT girl the-ACC basket gave
when the man gave the girl the basket

weil dem Lehrer der Roman gefiel
because the-DAT teacher the-NOM novel liked
because the teacher liked the novel

als Peter dem Touristen den Dom zeigte
when Peter the-DAT tourist the-ACC cathedral showed
when Peter showed the cathedral to the tourist

als dem Touristen der Dom gezeigt wurde
when the-DAT tourist the-NOM cathedral shown was
when the tourist was shown the cathedral

Peter nimmt den Kindern das Buch .
Peter takes the-DAT children-DAT the-ACC book-ACC .
Peter takes the book from the children .

Dem Hans habe ich das Buch gegeben
the.dat Hans have I.nom the.acc book given
To Hans I gave the book

Das Buch haben die Studenten nicht gelesen
the book have the students not read
That book the students have n't read

Wir glaubten daß sie den Brief ausstellte .
we believed that she the letter out-wrote .
We believed that she wrote out the letter .

Er bat mich PRO ihm zu helfen .
he asked me PRO him to help .
He asked me to help him .

Er bat mich PRO das Brief auszustellen .
he asked me PRO the letter out-to-write .
He asked me to write out the letter .

Wir glauben daß sie Heute ankommt .
we believe that she today arrives .
We believe that she arrives today .

Wir glaubten daß sie den Brief ausstellte .
we believed that she the letter out-wrote .
We believed that she wrote out the letter .

Wolfgang hat nach Leas Geburt an jedem Abend ein Bier getrunken .
Wolfgang has after Lea's birth on every evening a beer drunk .
After Lea 's birth , Wolfgang drank a beer every evening .

Wen glaubt jeder dass Karl gesehen hat ?
Who believes everyone that Karl seen has ?
Who does everyone believe that Karl saw ?

das von Fritz geschriebene Buch
the by Fritz written book
the book written by Fritz

Peter hat was er gemalt hat zurückgelassen .
Peter has what he painted has left .
Peter has left what he painted .

das Schicksal des weltbekannten Zeppelin-s
the fate THE-GEN famous Zeppelin-GEN
the fate of the famous Zeppelin

die Verarbeitung tropisch-en Holzes
the preparation tropical-en wood-GEN
the preparation of tropical wood

Das Buch ist nackt zu lesen .
the book is naked to read .
The book is to be read naked .

Er hat ihr nackt zu schlafen geraten .
he has her naked to sleep advised .
Naked , he advised her to sleep .

weil er nackt der Frau hilft .
because he naked the woman helps .
because he helps the woman naked .

(Weit) hinaus ist der Ball geworfen worden .
far out is the ball thrown got .
The ball was thrown far out .

Die Leviten werden wir dem Burschen lesen .
the Leviticus will we the scoundrel read .
We will read the scoundrel the riot act .

Die Wachen öffneten dem AngreiferDAT das Tor .
the guards opened the-DAT attacker the gate .
The guards opened the gate for the attacker .

Die Ärztin hat PaulaDAT Blut abgenommen .
the doctor has Paula blood withdrawn .
The doctor withdrew some of Paula 's blood .

Ihm standen vor Schreck die Haare zu Berge .
him-DAT stood with fright the hairs to mountain .
Due to the shock , his hair stood on end .

Dir bricht das Herz .
you-DAT breaks the-NOM heart .
Your heart is breaking .

Ich tu nicht (gerne) Bücher lesen .
I do not with.pleasure books read .
I do n't read books .

Die Freunde bewundern (der) Anna ihren Wagen .
the friends admire the-DAT Anna her-ACC car .
The friends admire Anna 's car .

Dieses Buch hat Martin geschrieben .
this book has Martin written .
This book , Martin wrote .

daß Otto Bücher über Wombats immer LIEST
that Otto books about wombats always reads
 ... that Otto always READS books about wombats

Ich lief zwei Meilen die Straße entlang .
I-NOM run-PST two miles-ACC the street-ACC along .
I ran this road two miles .

Ich besuchte New York zwei Mal .
I-NOM visit-PST New York-ACC two times-AC .
I visited New York twice .

weil ja doch Kinder auf der Straße spielen
since PRT PRT children on the street play
since children do play on the street

da hat er mit Hunde vertrieben
there has he with dogs chases-away
he has chased away dogs with it

Bucher sieht Anna drei .
Books sees Anna three .
As for books , Anna can see three .

Kaninchen hat Anna welche gesehen .
rabbits has Anna some seen .
As for rabbits , Anna could see some .

Im Meer zu schwimmen hat Spa gemacht .
in-the sea to swim has fun made .
Swimming in the sea was fun .

