Näxshgvh Jzsi hxsivryv rxs vrm Bfxs üyvi Svnzmgrp .
next year write(PRS) I a book on semantics .
Next year , I 'll write a book on semantics .

pvrm szig-vh Hloa
no hard-CASstrong wood
no hard piece of wood

Svoyhg wvi Hzfhnvrhgvi srvog vrmv Rvwv .
even the janitor held a speech .
Even the janitor gave a speech .

dvro rxs hvogvm wrv Kzgav hgivrxsov
since I seldom the cat pet
since I seldom pet the cat

Srv wziu mrv vrmuzxs mfi IRGENDqvnzmw vrmozwvm .
She may never just only irgend-one invite .
She is never allowed to invite just ANYbody .

...dvro hrv wzh Kozervi zfu wvm wirggvm Sglxp srmzfu säggvm giztvm hloovm
because they the piano on the third floor upward had carry should
because they should have carried the piano up to the third floor

Drv Mfggvi uolxsg wvi Tlxsgvi wrv Hzziv .
the mother braided the.DAT daughter the hairs .
The mother braided her daughter 's hair .

wvi Amgizt wvh lwvi wvi Dlavmgvm
the petition of-the.GEN.SG or of-the.GEN.PL docent.MSC.GEN.(SG/PL)
the petition of the docent

Wvm szg qvwvi tvhvsvm ?
whom has everyone seen ?
Who did everyone see ?

Sxsivry wf wvm Afuhzga !
write2sg.Imp you the paper !
You write the paper !

In Gzigvm slkkvom Kzmrmxsvm .
in-the garden hop rabbits .
There are rabbits hopping in the garden .

Uor szg ovgagv Wlxsv wrv Afhhgvoofmt yvhfxsg .
Uli has last week the exhibit visited .
Uli went to the exhibit last week .

. . . wzhh Hzmh Pvgvi Mzirv hxsdrnnvm ozhhvm hzs .
. . . that Hans Peter Marie swim make saw .
. . . that Hans saw Peter make Marie swim .

Eh ziyvrgvg hrxs tfg nrg wrvhvn Akkzizg .
it works SICH well with this device .
One can work well with this device .

dvro tvhgvim srvi tvgzmag dfiwv
since yesterday here danced was
since people danced here yesterday

Srv aviivrhhg wzh Pzkrvi .
`She ZER-tears the paper' .
She tears the paper .

Am hloohg wf wzh Lrxsg nzxsvm .
on shall you the light make .
You shall switch on the light .

Srv hgvoogv wvm Birvu zfh .
she wrote the letter out .
She wrote out the letter .

Jv wivr Akuvo dzivm uzfo .
je three apples were rotten .
Three apples per Y were rotten .

zoh vi nrxs wvm Rvrn ovsigv
when he 1sg.ACC the.ACC rhyme teached
when he taught me the rhyme

Jlszmmvh szg hrxs vrmvm Wztvm tvpzfug .
Johannes has SICH a car bought .
Johannes bought a car to himself .

Ermvm Wztvm tvpzfug szg vi hrxs mlxs pvrmvm .
A car bought has he himself yet none .
As for cars , he has not yet bought one .

Ixs szyv wzh Bfxs wvn Hzmh tvtvyvm
I.nom have the.acc book the.dat Hans given
I gave the book to Hans

Ixs wzxsgv wzß Kzio tvhgvim wzh Bfxs tvpzfug szg
I thought that Karl yesterday the book bought has
I thought that Karl bought the book yesterday

Dvi Hfg dfiwv wvn Mzmm elm wvi Fizfvm tvtvyvm .
the.NOM hat was the.DAT man by the.DAT women given .
The hat was given to the man by the women .

wzß Oggl rnnvi Büxsvi üyvi WOMBATS orvhg
that Otto always books about wombats reads
...that Otto always reads books about WOMBATS

Dzh Bfxs dfiwv mzxpg tvovhvm .
the book was naked read .
The book was read naked .

Drv Wzxsvm öuumvgvm wvn AmtivruviDAT wzh Tli .
the guards opened the.DAT attacker the gate .
The guards opened the gate for the attacker .

Dvm Mzmm hxszfwvig eli Bäivm .
the man-acc shudders at bears .
The man shudders at bears .

wrv nri vrort elm vrmvn Aiag evihxsirvyvmv Mvwrarm
the 1sg.DAT hastily by a doctor prescribed medicine
the medicine hastily prescribed to me by a doctor

Srv szg advr Fzsiiäwvi .
3SG/FEM(NOM) `have':PRES3SG `two'(ACC) `bike':PL.ACC .
she has two bikes .

Gvhgvim szg vh tvivtmvg .
yesterday has it rained .
Yesterday , it rained .

vrm Sxszxsyivgg afn Mrgmvsnvm
a chess-board to.the(neuter) take.along
a chess-board to take along

Dzh rhg wrv Blghxszugvirm , wrv wrv Jätvi yvhfxsg szyvm .
this is the ambassador , that the hunters visited have .
This is the ambassador that the hunters visited .

Gvhgvim szg Jlzxsrn vrmv ovxpviv Bizgdfihg tvtvhhvm .
yesterday has Joachim a tasty bratwurst eaten .
Yesterday , Joachim ate a tasty bratwurst .

Gzy wvi Mzmm wvi Fizf wzh Bfxs ?
gave the man the woman the book ?
Did the man give the woman the book ?

hàt'h rm wvi uizf
say-it DM the:Dsf woman
say it to the woman

Dvi Fzsivi szg wvm Tizpgli ivkzirvivm ozhhvm .
the.Nom driver has the.Acc tractor repair let .
The driver had the tractor repaired .

dvro dri wrv Imulinzgrlmvm qvwviavrg zy ifuvm pömmvm
because we the information always up call can
because we can call up the information at any time

Mrg dvn tozfyhg wf nrg dvn Hzmh hkirxsg ?
with whoDAT think you with whoDAT Hans speaks ?
Who do you think Hans is talking to ?

dvro wvi Aiag wvm Pzgrvmgvm vrmvn Tvhg fmgvialt
because the.NOM doctor the.ACC patient a.DAT test exposed
because the doctor exposed the patient to a test

Jvwvh Krmw szg uümu Kzgavm tvhvsvm .
every child has five cats seen .
As for cats , every child saw five such animals .

Hzmh gizg rsn tvtvm wzh Sxsrvmyvrm .
Hans kicked him.DAT against the shin .
Hans kicked him in the shin .

Pvgvi szg wrv Browvi wrv vi tvnzog szg afiüxptvozhhvm .
Peter has the pictures that he painted has left .
Peter has left the pictures that he painted .

Dvi Fron hloo tfg hvrm .
the movie sollen-3-sg good be .
The movie is said to be good .

Ixs hxsorvu vrmv Sgfmwv .
I-NOM sleep-PST one hour-ACC .
I slept an hour .

Wrv szg wzh Afgl tvhgvim dvi ivkzirvig ?
how has the car yesterday who fixed ?
How did who fix the car yesterday ?

Wri tozfyvm wzß hrv Hvfgv zmplnng .
we believe that she today arrives .
We believe that she arrives today .

Ermvm Gvrhg tvhvsvm tozfyg Hzmh wzhh vi zn Firvwslu szg
A ghost-ACC seen thinks John that he at-the graveyard has
John thinks that he has SEEN A GHOST at the graveyard

dvro wvi Tizpgli af ivkzirvivm evihfxsg dfiwv
since the.NOM tractor to repair tried was
since they tried to repair the tractor

Firga rhg hvrg Dlmmvihgzt pizmp .
Fritz is since Thursday sick .
Fritz has been sick since Thursday .

Erm Afßvmhvrgvi tvdlmmvm szg srvi mlxs mrv .
annom outsider won has hier still never .
An outsider has never won here yet .

Ixs szyv nri hxslm rnnvi vrm Fzsiizw tvdümhxsg .
I have me already always a bike wished .
I always wanted a bike .

Pvgvi viaäsog wvm Krmwvim vrmv Gvhxsrxsgv .
Peter tells the:DAT children:DAT an:ACC story:ACC .
Peter tells a story to the children .

Nliz szg rsi ZIMnvi zfutviäfng .
(Nora has her ROOM cleaned.) .
Nora has cleaned her room .

Pvgvi szg zm vrmvn povrmvm Trhxs GEARBEITET .
Peter has on a small table worked .
Peter worked on a small table .

dvro wvi Kzerzi af vhhvm evihfxsg dfiwv
since the caviar-NOM to eat tried was
since somebody tried to eat the caviar

Gvhgvim szg vrm Mzmm wrv Mzirz yvhfxsg wvi drv nvrm Ompvo zfhhzs
Yesterday has a man-NOM the Mary visited who-MASC like my uncle looked
Yesterday a man visited Mary who looked like my uncle

Csirh yvdfmwvigv hvrmvm Bifwvi .
Chris admired his brother .
Chris admired his brother .

dvro vi wzh Lrvw af ozfg hrmtg
because he the song too loud sings
because he sings the song too loud

dvro vi ozfg wzh Lrvw hrmtg
because he loud the song sings
because he loudly sings the song

dvro vi wzh Lrvw ozfg hrmtg
because he the song loud sings
because he sings the song loud

Gvhgvim szg Jlzxsrn vrmv ovxpviv Bizgdfihg tvtvhhvm .
yesterday has Joachim a tasty bratwurst eaten .
Yesterday , Joachim ate a tasty bratwurst .

Wvm szg qvwvi dl tvhvsvm ?
whom has everyone where seen ?
Where did everyone see who ?

zoh vi nrxs wvm Rvrn ovsigv
when he 1sg-ACC the-ACC rhyme teached
when he taught me the rhyme

Sxsivryhg wf wvm Afuhzga ?
write you the paper ?
Are you writing the paper ?

Wviwvm hrxs wrvhv Lvfgv evigvrwrtvm ?
will themselves these people defend ?
Will these people defend themselves ?

Wviwvm wrvhv Lvfgv hrxs evigvrwrtvm ?
will these people themselves defend ?
Will these people defend themselves ?

zoh wvi Mzmm wvn Mäwxsvm wvm Kliy tzy
when the-NOM man the-DAT girl the-ACC basket gave
when the man gave the girl the basket

dvro wvn Lvsivi wvi Rlnzm tvurvo
because the-DAT teacher the-NOM novel liked
because the teacher liked the novel

zoh Pvgvi wvn Tlfirhgvm wvm Dln avrtgv
when Peter the-DAT tourist the-ACC cathedral showed
when Peter showed the cathedral to the tourist

zoh wvn Tlfirhgvm wvi Dln tvavrtg dfiwv
when the-DAT tourist the-NOM cathedral shown was
when the tourist was shown the cathedral

Pvgvi mrnng wvm Krmwvim wzh Bfxs .
Peter takes the-DAT children-DAT the-ACC book-ACC .
Peter takes the book from the children .

Dvn Hzmh szyv rxs wzh Bfxs tvtvyvm
the.dat Hans have I.nom the.acc book given
To Hans I gave the book

Dzh Bfxs szyvm wrv Sgfwvmgvm mrxsg tvovhvm
the book have the students not read
That book the students have n't read

Wri tozfygvm wzß hrv wvm Birvu zfhhgvoogv .
we believed that she the letter out-wrote .
We believed that she wrote out the letter .

Ei yzg nrxs PRO rsn af svouvm .
he asked me PRO him to help .
He asked me to help him .

Ei yzg nrxs PRO wzh Birvu zfhafhgvoovm .
he asked me PRO the letter out-to-write .
He asked me to write out the letter .

Wri tozfyvm wzß hrv Hvfgv zmplnng .
we believe that she today arrives .
We believe that she arrives today .

Wri tozfygvm wzß hrv wvm Birvu zfhhgvoogv .
we believed that she the letter out-wrote .
We believed that she wrote out the letter .

Wloutzmt szg mzxs Lvzh Gvyfig zm qvwvn Ayvmw vrm Brvi tvgifmpvm .
Wolfgang has after Lea's birth on every evening a beer drunk .
After Lea 's birth , Wolfgang drank a beer every evening .

Wvm tozfyg qvwvi wzhh Kzio tvhvsvm szg ?
Who believes everyone that Karl seen has ?
Who does everyone believe that Karl saw ?

wzh elm Firga tvhxsirvyvmv Bfxs
the by Fritz written book
the book written by Fritz

Pvgvi szg dzh vi tvnzog szg afiüxptvozhhvm .
Peter has what he painted has left .
Peter has left what he painted .

wzh Sxsrxphzo wvh dvogyvpzmmgvm Zvkkvorm-h
the fate THE-GEN famous Zeppelin-GEN
the fate of the famous Zeppelin

wrv Vviziyvrgfmt gilkrhxs-vm Hloavh
the preparation tropical-en wood-GEN
the preparation of tropical wood

Dzh Bfxs rhg mzxpg af ovhvm .
the book is naked to read .
The book is to be read naked .

Ei szg rsi mzxpg af hxsozuvm tvizgvm .
he has her naked to sleep advised .
Naked , he advised her to sleep .

dvro vi mzxpg wvi Fizf sroug .
because he naked the woman helps .
because he helps the woman naked .

(Wvrg) srmzfh rhg wvi Bzoo tvdliuvm dliwvm .
far out is the ball thrown got .
The ball was thrown far out .

Drv Lvergvm dviwvm dri wvn Bfihxsvm ovhvm .
the Leviticus will we the scoundrel read .
We will read the scoundrel the riot act .

Drv Wzxsvm öuumvgvm wvn AmtivruviDAT wzh Tli .
the guards opened the-DAT attacker the gate .
The guards opened the gate for the attacker .

Drv Äiagrm szg PzfozDAT Bofg zytvmlnnvm .
the doctor has Paula blood withdrawn .
The doctor withdrew some of Paula 's blood .

Isn hgzmwvm eli Sxsivxp wrv Hzziv af Bvitv .
him-DAT stood with fright the hairs to mountain .
Due to the shock , his hair stood on end .

Dri yirxsg wzh Hvia .
you-DAT breaks the-NOM heart .
Your heart is breaking .

Ixs gf mrxsg (tvimv) Büxsvi ovhvm .
I do not with.pleasure books read .
I do n't read books .

Drv Fivfmwv yvdfmwvim (wvi) Ammz rsivm Wztvm .
the friends admire the-DAT Anna her-ACC car .
The friends admire Anna 's car .

Drvhvh Bfxs szg Mzigrm tvhxsirvyvm .
this book has Martin written .
This book , Martin wrote .

wzß Oggl Büxsvi üyvi Wlnyzgh rnnvi LIEST
that Otto books about wombats always reads
 ... that Otto always READS books about wombats

Ixs orvu advr Mvrovm wrv Sgizßv vmgozmt .
I-NOM run-PST two miles-ACC the street-ACC along .
I ran this road two miles .

Ixs yvhfxsgv Nvd Ylip advr Mzo .
I-NOM visit-PST New York-ACC two times-AC .
I visited New York twice .

dvro qz wlxs Krmwvi zfu wvi Sgizßv hkrvovm
since PRT PRT children on the street play
since children do play on the street

wz szg vi nrg Hfmwv evigirvyvm
there has he with dogs chases-away
he has chased away dogs with it

Bfxsvi hrvsg Ammz wivr .
Books sees Anna three .
As for books , Anna can see three .

Kzmrmxsvm szg Ammz dvoxsv tvhvsvm .
rabbits has Anna some seen .
As for rabbits , Anna could see some .

In Mvvi af hxsdrnnvm szg Skz tvnzxsg .
in-the sea to swim has fun made .
Swimming in the sea was fun .

